PARTICLE LAB
Start here

WHAT YOU NEED
A computer with Python 3.10 or newer and a modern desktop browser.
The trained model is already included. No account, API key, pip installation,
Node installation, or model training is needed to run the app.

WINDOWS QUICK START
1. Right-click the project ZIP and choose Extract All.
2. Open the extracted particle_lab folder. You should see app.py here.
3. Double-click START_WINDOWS.bat.
4. Your browser should open Particle Lab. Keep the terminal window open.

If the browser does not open, enter this address in your browser:
http://127.0.0.1:8765

ALTERNATIVE USING A TERMINAL
Open the particle_lab folder in File Explorer.
Click the address bar, type cmd, then press Enter.
In the new terminal, enter:

    py -3 app.py

If the py command is unavailable, try:

    python app.py

If neither command works, install Python from https://www.python.org/downloads/
using its Windows installer, then reopen the terminal and try again.
Do not double-click web/index.html; app.py serves the model and modules locally.

STOP AND RESTART
To stop: click the terminal and press Ctrl+C.
To restart: double-click START_WINDOWS.bat again, or run the same command.
After editing a file, refresh the browser. A hard refresh is Ctrl+Shift+R.
If the port is occupied, run: py -3 app.py --port 8766

TRY THESE FIRST
- Select Sphere, Cube, Ring, or Helix from Formation.
- Uncheck Animate formation to hold the shape; check it to resume its path.
- Select Push, then hold and drag inside the simulation.
- Choose Auto under Depth mode to follow the frontmost particles under your
  cursor. Empty space does not push. Choose Manual to use the depth slider.
- Adjust Pusher depth in Manual mode to reach particles in front of or behind the center.
  For a sphere, pushing at its visible edge is an easy first experiment.
- Let go and move the tool away: particles ease back while motion is enabled.
- Use Orbit to rotate, Pan to reposition, and your mouse wheel to zoom.
- Drag the dividers to change menu width and simulation height.
- Scroll inside the lower panel. The simulation stays in place.
- Scroll down below the large performance chart for the two live model feeds.

COLOR KEY
White: outside the tool's influence.
Inside the tool: baby blue at the far edge, then green, yellow, and red nearest.
Hovering previews the affected region. Holding the mouse applies the force.
The pusher is three dimensional; a particle that overlaps its screen circle
can still be outside its depth range.

ABOUT THE AI
A bundled, trained neural network predicts the next local displacement of a
sample of particles. The feed compares its prediction with the actual engine.
The neural network does not control the animation. Its errors cannot send
visible particles out of control. You can disable the comparison if needed.
Read docs/MODEL_CARD.md for actual training and evaluation results.

PERFORMANCE AND GRAPHICS
WebGL compute updates particles in graphics buffers. Whether your browser uses
hardware or a software renderer depends on your device and browser settings.
A blank GPU timing value means that measurement is unavailable, not zero.
If performance is slow, reduce particle count, reduce particle size, or turn
off the live prediction comparison. CPU reference is available in Compute mode.
You can force CPU reference at launch by opening:
http://127.0.0.1:8765/?cpu=1

SAVING
Save setup downloads starting controls and the seed, not a live particle-state
checkpoint. Load setup recreates that starting experiment. Screenshot exports
only the simulation. Export CSV downloads the last 60 seconds of measured
performance. Record snapshot stores a setup and recent timing summary in this
browser. Downloads go to your browser's usual download location.

NEXT FILES TO READ
README.md                    Project overview and technical scope
GITHUB_GUIDE.md              Upload using the GitHub website
LEARN_THE_PROJECT.md         Plain-language explanation of the code
web/models/training_report.json   Detailed model evaluation numbers
